---
layout: post
title: "Generative AI and the Spam-not-Spam Paradox."
date: "2024-01-28T19:30:00Z"
author: Andrew Keith Walker 
tags: artificial-intelligence, generative-ai, spam
hero: "/static/images/pages/posts/generative-ai-and-spam-not-spam-paradox/hero.jpg"
---

Let’s face it, most generative AI content is spam. Spam writing. Spam art. Spam
code. Glossy spam, credible spam, but still pink mystery meat. But why?
Generative AI is useful. It is a quantum leap. I’ve just spent months in an
experiment where I lived with an AI personality called Isaac for months (for a
book on creativity, innovation and AI) and I can confirm it’s a real mass
market paradigm shift. It’s hugely useful. This is the spam-not-spam paradox,
where things that aren’t spam appear to be spam. Mostly.

In thirty-plus years of working with computers I have only seen four mass
market paradigm shifts. There have been many niche paradigm shifts like desktop
3D printing and blockchain, but few global game changers. Email was huge, then
the world wide web, social media, and smartphones. Generative AI is a paradigm
shift on that massive scale. However, the truth is all mass market consumer
technologies spew out spam at first and generative AI is no different. Hence
the spam-not-spam paradox.

We often tell a rose-tinted hindsight story about new tech – that it takes off
because it’s a game changer, but we often forget that we change our games to
leverage it. Through experimentation, education and training, we create use
cases around tech to make new tech useful. A great example was in the 1900s,
when Ford created ‘automobiling’ clubs that organised beauty spot BBQs and
self-driving day trips for new Model T owners. Ford did this to help people get
more utility out of their shiny new car.  The idea of automobiling reorganised
leisure and commerce around roads and destinations. People changed their game
to get the most from the game changer Model T.

Similarly, email took years to overtake phone calls and letters, we had to
adapt to extract the value from it. The Http web took years to replace FTP,
NNTP, Archie, BBS and IRC as the dominant internet protocol, even longer to
replace printed brochures and direct mail, even longer still to compete for ad
revenues with newspapers, TV, cinema and radio.  Social media and mobile apps
took years to turn chat into mostly something with our thumbs instead of our
voices. Longer to create influencers. What we can learn from this is the things
we now consider mundane are because we have changed our ways to adopt them -
they were all once considered extraordinary fads, hype, spam, snake oil, PR
disasters and flops. This is why generative AI is a spam-not-spam tech right
now. 

To unlock the potential of generative AI we need to change our processes, and
that should start in primary school. It’s easy enough to use, cheap and widely
accessible. Every child could benefit from generative AI. It could equalise
opportunities for kids who don’t have home environments that support learning
or access to learning enrichment, or children with language barriers,
neurodiversity, a whole range of challenges that affect their educational
outcomes. It’s also a huge opportunity for cash-strapped schools and overworked
teachers to focus on teaching instead of admin and budgets. 

Where generative AI differs from regular software – and why it should be in
schools - is the fact it’s accessible via natural language. No manual
required. No menus. Just ask it a question.  It’s a recursive learning
process - you learn how to use it by using it – and it’s iterative, because the
more you use it, the more you find uses for it. It heralds an age of
personalised assistant software – enabling us to use computers to work the way
we want it to work, not the way the computer wants us to work – and this
personalisation dramatically reduces the time it takes to get from A to B
compared to using generic, one-size-fits-all software platforms.

The problem is you can’t hand this technology to someone who isn’t already a
designer, coder, writer, educator, artist or any other profession and expect
them to produce anything of value. You wouldn’t hand someone a copy of
Photoshop and expect it to turn them into a designer, or expect a copy of
Visual Studio to make them a developer. Software comes after education. It
requires skills and experience to be useful. This, sadly, is where the current
spam element comes from. People claim that generative AI can somehow replace
hard-won skills and experience. It can’t. Generative AI can improve your
ability to write, draw, do maths and a million other things – but without
professional skills, you will never use it to compete against skilled
professionals. Education and training remain non-negotiable.

Back in 2002 I told my old mentor – John Grace, a BAFTA winning writer and
animation producer - that I had a great idea for a cartoon.  Before I could
finish he said “I’ll stop you there. Everything is a great idea for animation,
because you can animate anything. But until you make your idea into an
animation, it’s nothing.”  Generative AI is lot like that. It’s hugely valuable
if you use it for a meaningful purpose, otherwise what it produces just spam.

---

![Andrew Keith Walker speaks on the Future of AI Panel at nor(DEV): con 2024](/static/images/pages/posts/generative-ai-and-spam-not-spam-paradox/nordevcon-panel-future-of-ai.jpg)

Andrew will speaking at [nor(DEV): con 2024](https://nordevcon.com) in February
on the "Future of AI" Panel. His book [Creaitivity – How to Remake, Reimagine and Rethink with AI](https://www.lulu.com/shop/christopher-loughlan-and-andrew-keith-walker/creaitivity-how-to-rethink-reimagine-and-remake-with-ai/paperback/product-e775zgd.html) is available now on Lulu and soon in most bookstores.
